A morpheme is the smallest unit of speech that has morpheme. Some morphemes are
bound, meaning that they have to be attached to some other morpheme. Other
morphemes are free, meaning that they can stand by themselves. For example, the
word "bike" is a free morpheme. It conveys meaning, and doesn't need any other
word supporting it. On the other hand "-s" is a bound morpheme. It conveys
meaning, ie that there's more than one of something, but it cannot stand on its
own.

A phoneme is the smalles unit of speech when talking about sound. A sound is a
phoneme in a language if there are two different words that differ only by that
sound. For example, there are phonemes /b/ and /p/ because the words "pat" and
"bat", pronounced /paet/ and /baet/ differ only by the /p/ and /b/ sounds.

An allophone is an alternate pronunciation of a phoneme. This happens whenever
two sounds occur in complementary distribution. This means that you can predict
whether the sound will be one or the other based entirely on its position. For
example, word initially, the /t/ phoneme gets pronounced /t^h/. So "top" gets
pronounced /t^hap/ while "stop" gets pronounced /stap/. These are different
sounds, but you can predict whether it will be /t/ or /t^h/, so, in English,
they are really just two variations of the same sound.

Semantics is the study of meaning. This is a fairly daunting idea, but it is
done fairly simply. In semantics, some important tools include logic and set
theory. Basically, in a sentence like "Joan is a clock", thre truth value
depends on "Is Joan a member of the set of all clocks". Then, examining which of
the set of possible worlds we live in, we can determine whether or not this
sentence is true.

There are some similar languages, right? For example, why does Spanish "padre"
look kinda like English "father", or "por" and "for"? Moreover, if you know
Ancient Greek and Latin, things get even more similar, with "pater" and "pater",
"mater" and "mater", etc. It turns out, that all Indo-European languages, so
languages decended from Latin, Greek, Slavic languages, Germanic languages,
Celtic languages, Albanian, Baltic languages, and a bunch of dead language
families, are all decended from a common ancestor, Proto-Indo-European.

Proto-Indo-European, or PIE, is a very strange language. It has a lot of
familiar words, but very bizarre grammar and incredibly weird phonology. It
probably had three vowels e, o, and a, several consonants including a set of
unvoiced, voiced, and breathy voiced bilabial, alveolar, velar, and post-velar
stops, several sonorants including m, n, l, and r, some fricatives including s
and some very mysterious sounds called laryngeals. These laryngeals are called
h1, h2, and h3 and were probably pronounced something like a glottal stop or
fricative, a voiceless uvular fricative, and a voiced pharyngeal fricative with
lip rounding respectively. All we really know is that h1 "e-colored" vowels, h2
"a-colored" vowels, and h3 "o-colored" vowels. Based off of modern Arabic, which
has similar consonants and vowels and has vowel coloring, we can guess the
pronounciation of the laryngeals.

PIE also had very weird grammar. Instead of making a bunch of tense distinctions
like modern languages, PIE was more concerned with aspects. There were three
kinds of verbs, present, aorist, and perfect (which correspond with the modern
terms imperfective, perfective, and stative aspects). Verbs could be any of the
three types, and there was some derivational morphology in place to allow you to
switch between types, but it was not very regular or strict. For example, the
root "gwem" was a root aorist, meaning that if you inflected the root, you got
verbs with an aorist aspect. So "gwemmi" was kind of like "I stepped", "gwemsi"
was kind of like "you stepped", etc. But you could add the "-ske" suffix to
change it to the present stem "gwmske" and get the verbs "gwmskomi" for "I am
stepping", "gwmskesi" for "you are stepping", etc. Or, you could reduplicate the
root to get the perfect verb stem "gwegwom" to get the verbs "gwegwome" for
something like "I have stepped" in later PIE and something extremely hard to
interpret in PIE proper.

You probably noticed that "gwem" followed clear patterns, you add "-mi" for
first person, "-si" for second person, etc. but adding "-ske" totally broke
everything. This is because of a complicated system called ablaut. Verbs had
accent in PIE. The root "gwem" was really more like "gw`em" and the suffix
"-sk`e" had accent. When vowels are accented, they are in full grade, meaning
that are pronounced like you'd expect, but when they aren't accented, things get
weird and some vowels are dropped. So "gw`em-" + "-sk`e" becomes "gwmsk`e-",
which is perfectly fine because sonorants can be nuclei of syllables (and can
carry accent in one known word "w`lkwos", or "wolf"). On top of this, the e in
"-sk`e" could switch to an o before nasals, which is why you have "gwmskomi"
rather than "gwemskemi" like you'd expect.

Linguistics is the study of language.
